THE TRAGEDY OF HAMLET, PRINCE OF DENMARK

by William Shakespeare


Contents

ACT I
Scene I. Elsinore. A platform before the Castle.
Scene II. Elsinore. A room of state in the Castle
Scene III. A room in Polonius’s house.
Scene IV. The platform.
Scene V. A more remote part of the Castle.

ACT II
Scene I. A room in Polonius’s house.
Scene II. A room in the Castle.

ACT III
Scene I. A room in the Castle.
Scene II. A hall in the Castle.
Scene III. A room in the Castle.
Scene IV. Another room in the Castle.

ACT IV
Scene I. A room in the Castle.
Scene II. Another room in the Castle.
Scene III. Another room in the Castle.
Scene IV. A plain in Denmark.
Scene V. Elsinore. A room in the Castle.
Scene VI. Another room in the Castle.
Scene VII. Another room in the Castle.

ACT V
Scene I. A churchyard.
Scene II. A hall in the Castle.


Dramatis Personæ

HAMLET, Prince of Denmark.
CLAUDIUS, King of Denmark, Hamlet’s uncle.
The GHOST of the late king, Hamlet’s father.
GERTRUDE, the Queen, Hamlet’s mother, now wife of Claudius.
POLONIUS, Lord Chamberlain.
LAERTES, Son to Polonius.
OPHELIA, Daughter to Polonius.
HORATIO, Friend to Hamlet.
FORTINBRAS, Prince of Norway.
VOLTEMAND, Courtier.
CORNELIUS, Courtier.
ROSENCRANTZ, Courtier.
GUILDENSTERN, Courtier.
MARCELLUS, Officer.
BARNARDO, Officer.
FRANCISCO, a Soldier
OSRIC, Courtier.
REYNALDO, Servant to Polonius.
Players.
A Gentleman, Courtier.
A Priest.
Two Clowns, Grave-diggers.
A Captain.
English Ambassadors.
Lords, Ladies, Officers, Soldiers, Sailors, Messengers, and Attendants.

SCENE. Elsinore.



ACT I

SCENE I. Elsinore. A platform before the Castle.

 Enter Francisco and Barnardo, two sentinels.

BARNARDO. Who’s there?

FRANCISCO. Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.

BARNARDO. Long live the King!

FRANCISCO. Barnardo?

BARNARDO. He.

FRANCISCO. You come most carefully upon your hour.

BARNARDO. ’Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.

FRANCISCO. For this relief much thanks. ’Tis bitter cold, And I am sick
at heart.

BARNARDO. Have you had quiet guard?

FRANCISCO. Not a mouse stirring.

BARNARDO. Well, good night. If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus, The
rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.

 Enter Horatio and Marcellus.

FRANCISCO. I think I hear them. Stand, ho! Who is there?

HORATIO. Friends to this ground.

MARCELLUS. And liegemen to the Dane.

FRANCISCO. Give you good night.

MARCELLUS. O, farewell, honest soldier, who hath reliev’d you?

FRANCISCO. Barnardo has my place. Give you good-night.

 [_Exit._]

MARCELLUS. Holla, Barnardo!

BARNARDO. Say, what, is Horatio there?

HORATIO. A piece of him.

BARNARDO. Welcome, Horatio. Welcome, good Marcellus.

MARCELLUS. What, has this thing appear’d again tonight?

BARNARDO. I have seen nothing.

MARCELLUS. Horatio says ’tis but our fantasy, And will not let belief
take hold of him Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us.
Therefore I have entreated him along With us to watch the minutes of
this night, That if again this apparition come He may approve our eyes
and speak to it.

HORATIO. Tush, tush, ’twill not appear.

BARNARDO. Sit down awhile, And let us once again assail your ears, That
are so fortified against our story, What we two nights have seen.

HORATIO. Well, sit we down, And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.

BARNARDO. Last night of all, When yond same star that’s westward from
the pole, Had made his course t’illume that part of heaven Where now it
burns, Marcellus and myself, The bell then beating one—

MARCELLUS. Peace, break thee off. Look where it comes again.

 Enter Ghost.

BARNARDO. In the same figure, like the King that’s dead.

MARCELLUS. Thou art a scholar; speak to it, Horatio.

BARNARDO. Looks it not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.

HORATIO. Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.

BARNARDO It would be spoke to.

MARCELLUS. Question it, Horatio.

HORATIO. What art thou that usurp’st this time of night, Together with
that fair and warlike form In which the majesty of buried Denmark Did
sometimes march? By heaven I charge thee speak.

MARCELLUS. It is offended.

BARNARDO. See, it stalks away.

HORATIO. Stay! speak, speak! I charge thee speak!

 [_Exit Ghost._]

MARCELLUS. ’Tis gone, and will not answer.

BARNARDO. How now, Horatio! You tremble and look pale. Is not this
something more than fantasy? What think you on’t?

HORATIO. Before my God, I might not this believe Without the sensible
and true avouch Of mine own eyes.

MARCELLUS. Is it not like the King?

HORATIO. As thou art to thyself: Such was the very armour he had on
When he th’ambitious Norway combated; So frown’d he once, when in an
angry parle He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice. ’Tis strange.

MARCELLUS. Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour, With martial
stalk hath he gone by our watch.

HORATIO. In what particular thought to work I know not; But in the
gross and scope of my opinion, This bodes some strange eruption to our
state.

MARCELLUS. Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows, Why this
same strict and most observant watch So nightly toils the subject of
the land, And why such daily cast of brazen cannon And foreign mart for
implements of war; Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
Does not divide the Sunday from the week. What might be toward, that
this sweaty haste Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day: Who
is’t that can inform me?

HORATIO. That can I; At least, the whisper goes so. Our last King,
Whose image even but now appear’d to us, Was, as you know, by
Fortinbras of Norway, Thereto prick’d on by a most emulate pride, Dar’d
to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet, For so this side of our
known world esteem’d him, Did slay this Fortinbras; who by a seal’d
compact, Well ratified by law and heraldry, Did forfeit, with his life,
all those his lands Which he stood seiz’d of, to the conqueror; Against
the which, a moiety competent Was gaged by our King; which had return’d
To the inheritance of Fortinbras, Had he been vanquisher; as by the
same cov’nant And carriage of the article design’d, His fell to Hamlet.
Now, sir, young Fortinbras, Of unimproved mettle, hot and full, Hath in
the skirts of Norway, here and there, Shark’d up a list of lawless
resolutes, For food and diet, to some enterprise That hath a stomach
in’t; which is no other, As it doth well appear unto our state, But to
recover of us by strong hand And terms compulsatory, those foresaid
lands So by his father lost. And this, I take it, Is the main motive of
our preparations, The source of this our watch, and the chief head Of
this post-haste and rummage in the land.

BARNARDO. I think it be no other but e’en so: Well may it sort that
this portentous figure Comes armed through our watch so like the King
That was and is the question of these wars.

HORATIO. A mote it is to trouble the mind’s eye. In the most high and
palmy state of Rome, A little ere the mightiest Julius fell, The graves
stood tenantless and the sheeted dead Did squeak and gibber in the
Roman streets; As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,
Disasters in the sun; and the moist star, Upon whose influence
Neptune’s empire stands, Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse. And
even the like precurse of fierce events, As harbingers preceding still
the fates And prologue to the omen coming on, Have heaven and earth
together demonstrated Unto our climatures and countrymen.

 Re-enter Ghost.

But, soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again! I’ll cross it, though it
blast me. Stay, illusion! If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,
Speak to me. If there be any good thing to be done, That may to thee do
ease, and grace to me, Speak to me. If thou art privy to thy country’s
fate, Which, happily, foreknowing may avoid, O speak! Or if thou hast
uphoarded in thy life Extorted treasure in the womb of earth, For
which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death, Speak of it. Stay, and
speak!

 [_The cock crows._]

Stop it, Marcellus!

MARCELLUS. Shall I strike at it with my partisan?

HORATIO. Do, if it will not stand.

BARNARDO. ’Tis here!

HORATIO. ’Tis here!

 [_Exit Ghost._]

MARCELLUS. ’Tis gone! We do it wrong, being so majestical, To offer it
the show of violence, For it is as the air, invulnerable, And our vain
blows malicious mockery.

BARNARDO. It was about to speak, when the cock crew.

HORATIO. And then it started, like a guilty thing Upon a fearful
summons. I have heard The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn, Doth
with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat Awake the god of day; and at
his warning, Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air, Th’extravagant
and erring spirit hies To his confine. And of the truth herein This
present object made probation.

MARCELLUS. It faded on the crowing of the cock. Some say that ever
’gainst that season comes Wherein our Saviour’s birth is celebrated,
The bird of dawning singeth all night long; And then, they say, no
spirit dare stir abroad, The nights are wholesome, then no planets
strike, No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm; So hallow’d and
so gracious is the time.

HORATIO. So have I heard, and do in part believe it. But look, the morn
in russet mantle clad, Walks o’er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
Break we our watch up, and by my advice, Let us impart what we have
seen tonight Unto young Hamlet; for upon my life, This spirit, dumb to
us, will speak to him. Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it, As
needful in our loves, fitting our duty?

MARCELLUS. Let’s do’t, I pray, and I this morning know Where we shall
find him most conveniently.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Elsinore. A room of state in the Castle.

 Enter Claudius King of Denmark, Gertrude the Queen, Hamlet, Polonius,
 Laertes, Voltemand, Cornelius, Lords and Attendant.

KING. Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother’s death The memory be
green, and that it us befitted To bear our hearts in grief, and our
whole kingdom To be contracted in one brow of woe; Yet so far hath
discretion fought with nature That we with wisest sorrow think on him,
Together with remembrance of ourselves. Therefore our sometime sister,
now our queen, Th’imperial jointress to this warlike state, Have we, as
’twere with a defeated joy, With one auspicious and one dropping eye,
With mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage, In equal scale
weighing delight and dole, Taken to wife; nor have we herein barr’d
Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone With this affair along. For
all, our thanks. Now follows, that you know young Fortinbras, Holding a
weak supposal of our worth, Or thinking by our late dear brother’s
death Our state to be disjoint and out of frame, Colleagued with this
dream of his advantage, He hath not fail’d to pester us with message,
Importing the surrender of those lands Lost by his father, with all
bonds of law, To our most valiant brother. So much for him. Now for
ourself and for this time of meeting: Thus much the business is: we
have here writ To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras, Who, impotent and
bed-rid, scarcely hears Of this his nephew’s purpose, to suppress His
further gait herein; in that the levies, The lists, and full
proportions are all made Out of his subject: and we here dispatch You,
good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand, For bearers of this greeting to old
Norway, Giving to you no further personal power To business with the
King, more than the scope Of these dilated articles allow. Farewell;
and let your haste commend your duty.

CORNELIUS and VOLTEMAND. In that, and all things, will we show our
duty.

KING. We doubt it nothing: heartily farewell.

 [_Exeunt Voltemand and Cornelius._]

And now, Laertes, what’s the news with you? You told us of some suit.
What is’t, Laertes? You cannot speak of reason to the Dane, And lose
your voice. What wouldst thou beg, Laertes, That shall not be my offer,
not thy asking? The head is not more native to the heart, The hand more
instrumental to the mouth, Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
What wouldst thou have, Laertes?

LAERTES. Dread my lord, Your leave and favour to return to France, From
whence though willingly I came to Denmark To show my duty in your
coronation; Yet now I must confess, that duty done, My thoughts and
wishes bend again toward France, And bow them to your gracious leave
and pardon.

KING. Have you your father’s leave? What says Polonius?

POLONIUS. He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave By laboursome
petition; and at last Upon his will I seal’d my hard consent. I do
beseech you give him leave to go.

KING. Take thy fair hour, Laertes; time be thine, And thy best graces
spend it at thy will! But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son—

HAMLET. [_Aside._] A little more than kin, and less than kind.

KING. How is it that the clouds still hang on you?

HAMLET. Not so, my lord, I am too much i’ the sun.

QUEEN. Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off, And let thine eye look
like a friend on Denmark. Do not for ever with thy vailed lids Seek for
thy noble father in the dust. Thou know’st ’tis common, all that lives
must die, Passing through nature to eternity.

HAMLET. Ay, madam, it is common.

QUEEN. If it be, Why seems it so particular with thee?

HAMLET. Seems, madam! Nay, it is; I know not seems. ’Tis not alone my
inky cloak, good mother, Nor customary suits of solemn black, Nor windy
suspiration of forc’d breath, No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
Nor the dejected haviour of the visage, Together with all forms, moods,
shows of grief, That can denote me truly. These indeed seem, For they
are actions that a man might play; But I have that within which passeth
show; These but the trappings and the suits of woe.

KING. ’Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet, To give these
mourning duties to your father; But you must know, your father lost a
father, That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound In filial
obligation, for some term To do obsequious sorrow. But to persevere In
obstinate condolement is a course Of impious stubbornness. ’Tis unmanly
grief, It shows a will most incorrect to heaven, A heart unfortified, a
mind impatient, An understanding simple and unschool’d; For what we
know must be, and is as common As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
Why should we in our peevish opposition Take it to heart? Fie, ’tis a
fault to heaven, A fault against the dead, a fault to nature, To reason
most absurd, whose common theme Is death of fathers, and who still hath
cried, From the first corse till he that died today, ‘This must be so.’
We pray you throw to earth This unprevailing woe, and think of us As of
a father; for let the world take note You are the most immediate to our
throne, And with no less nobility of love Than that which dearest
father bears his son Do I impart toward you. For your intent In going
back to school in Wittenberg, It is most retrograde to our desire: And
we beseech you bend you to remain Here in the cheer and comfort of our
eye, Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.

QUEEN. Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet. I pray thee stay
with us; go not to Wittenberg.

HAMLET. I shall in all my best obey you, madam.

KING. Why, ’tis a loving and a fair reply. Be as ourself in Denmark.
Madam, come; This gentle and unforc’d accord of Hamlet Sits smiling to
my heart; in grace whereof, No jocund health that Denmark drinks today
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell, And the King’s rouse the
heaven shall bruit again, Re-speaking earthly thunder. Come away.

 [_Exeunt all but Hamlet._]

HAMLET. O that this too too solid flesh would melt, Thaw, and resolve
itself into a dew! Or that the Everlasting had not fix’d His canon
’gainst self-slaughter. O God! O God! How weary, stale, flat, and
unprofitable Seem to me all the uses of this world! Fie on’t! Oh fie!
’tis an unweeded garden That grows to seed; things rank and gross in
nature Possess it merely. That it should come to this! But two months
dead—nay, not so much, not two: So excellent a king; that was to this
Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother, That he might not beteem
the winds of heaven Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth! Must
I remember? Why, she would hang on him As if increase of appetite had
grown By what it fed on; and yet, within a month— Let me not think
on’t—Frailty, thy name is woman! A little month, or ere those shoes
were old With which she followed my poor father’s body Like Niobe, all
tears.—Why she, even she— O God! A beast that wants discourse of reason
Would have mourn’d longer,—married with mine uncle, My father’s
brother; but no more like my father Than I to Hercules. Within a month?
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears Had left the flushing in her
galled eyes, She married. O most wicked speed, to post With such
dexterity to incestuous sheets! It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
But break my heart, for I must hold my tongue.

 Enter Horatio, Marcellus and Barnardo.

HORATIO. Hail to your lordship!

HAMLET. I am glad to see you well: Horatio, or I do forget myself.

HORATIO. The same, my lord, And your poor servant ever.

HAMLET. Sir, my good friend; I’ll change that name with you: And what
make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?— Marcellus?

MARCELLUS. My good lord.

HAMLET. I am very glad to see you.—Good even, sir.— But what, in faith,
make you from Wittenberg?

HORATIO. A truant disposition, good my lord.

HAMLET. I would not hear your enemy say so; Nor shall you do my ear
that violence, To make it truster of your own report Against yourself.
I know you are no truant. But what is your affair in Elsinore? We’ll
teach you to drink deep ere you depart.

HORATIO. My lord, I came to see your father’s funeral.

HAMLET. I prithee do not mock me, fellow-student. I think it was to see
my mother’s wedding.

HORATIO. Indeed, my lord, it follow’d hard upon.

HAMLET. Thrift, thrift, Horatio! The funeral bak’d meats Did coldly
furnish forth the marriage tables. Would I had met my dearest foe in
heaven Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio. My father,—methinks I see
my father.

HORATIO. Where, my lord?

HAMLET. In my mind’s eye, Horatio.

HORATIO. I saw him once; he was a goodly king.

HAMLET. He was a man, take him for all in all, I shall not look upon
his like again.

HORATIO. My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.

HAMLET. Saw? Who?

HORATIO. My lord, the King your father.

HAMLET. The King my father!

HORATIO. Season your admiration for a while With an attent ear, till I
may deliver Upon the witness of these gentlemen This marvel to you.

HAMLET. For God’s love let me hear.

HORATIO. Two nights together had these gentlemen, Marcellus and
Barnardo, on their watch In the dead waste and middle of the night,
Been thus encounter’d. A figure like your father, Armed at point
exactly, cap-à-pie, Appears before them, and with solemn march Goes
slow and stately by them: thrice he walk’d By their oppress’d and
fear-surprised eyes, Within his truncheon’s length; whilst they,
distill’d Almost to jelly with the act of fear, Stand dumb, and speak
not to him. This to me In dreadful secrecy impart they did, And I with
them the third night kept the watch, Where, as they had deliver’d, both
in time, Form of the thing, each word made true and good, The
apparition comes. I knew your father; These hands are not more like.

HAMLET. But where was this?

MARCELLUS. My lord, upon the platform where we watch.

HAMLET. Did you not speak to it?

HORATIO. My lord, I did; But answer made it none: yet once methought It
lifted up it head, and did address Itself to motion, like as it would
speak. But even then the morning cock crew loud, And at the sound it
shrunk in haste away, And vanish’d from our sight.

HAMLET. ’Tis very strange.

HORATIO. As I do live, my honour’d lord, ’tis true; And we did think it
writ down in our duty To let you know of it.

HAMLET. Indeed, indeed, sirs, but this troubles me. Hold you the watch
tonight?

Mar. and BARNARDO. We do, my lord.

HAMLET. Arm’d, say you?

Both. Arm’d, my lord.

HAMLET. From top to toe?

BOTH. My lord, from head to foot.

HAMLET. Then saw you not his face?

HORATIO. O yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.

HAMLET. What, look’d he frowningly?

HORATIO. A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.

HAMLET. Pale, or red?

HORATIO. Nay, very pale.

HAMLET. And fix’d his eyes upon you?

HORATIO. Most constantly.

HAMLET. I would I had been there.

HORATIO. It would have much amaz’d you.

HAMLET. Very like, very like. Stay’d it long?

HORATIO. While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.

MARCELLUS and BARNARDO. Longer, longer.

HORATIO. Not when I saw’t.

HAMLET. His beard was grizzled, no?

HORATIO. It was, as I have seen it in his life, A sable silver’d.

HAMLET. I will watch tonight; Perchance ’twill walk again.

HORATIO. I warrant you it will.

HAMLET. If it assume my noble father’s person, I’ll speak to it, though
hell itself should gape And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all, If
you have hitherto conceal’d this sight, Let it be tenable in your
silence still; And whatsoever else shall hap tonight, Give it an
understanding, but no tongue. I will requite your loves. So, fare ye
well. Upon the platform ’twixt eleven and twelve, I’ll visit you.

ALL. Our duty to your honour.

HAMLET. Your loves, as mine to you: farewell.

 [_Exeunt Horatio, Marcellus and Barnardo._]

My father’s spirit in arms! All is not well; I doubt some foul play:
would the night were come! Till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds
will rise, Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s eyes.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE III. A room in Polonius’s house.

 Enter Laertes and Ophelia.

LAERTES. My necessaries are embark’d. Farewell. And, sister, as the
winds give benefit And convoy is assistant, do not sleep, But let me
hear from you.

OPHELIA. Do you doubt that?

LAERTES. For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favour, Hold it a fashion
and a toy in blood; A violet in the youth of primy nature, Forward, not
permanent, sweet, not lasting; The perfume and suppliance of a minute;
No more.

OPHELIA. No more but so?

LAERTES. Think it no more. For nature crescent does not grow alone In
thews and bulk; but as this temple waxes, The inward service of the
mind and soul Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now, And now no
soil nor cautel doth besmirch The virtue of his will; but you must
fear, His greatness weigh’d, his will is not his own; For he himself is
subject to his birth: He may not, as unvalu’d persons do, Carve for
himself; for on his choice depends The sanctity and health of this
whole state; And therefore must his choice be circumscrib’d Unto the
voice and yielding of that body Whereof he is the head. Then if he says
he loves you, It fits your wisdom so far to believe it As he in his
particular act and place May give his saying deed; which is no further
Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal. Then weigh what loss your
honour may sustain If with too credent ear you list his songs, Or lose
your heart, or your chaste treasure open To his unmaster’d importunity.
Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister; And keep you in the rear of
your affection, Out of the shot and danger of desire. The chariest maid
is prodigal enough If she unmask her beauty to the moon. Virtue itself
scopes not calumnious strokes: The canker galls the infants of the
spring Too oft before their buttons be disclos’d, And in the morn and
liquid dew of youth Contagious blastments are most imminent. Be wary
then, best safety lies in fear. Youth to itself rebels, though none
else near.

OPHELIA. I shall th’effect of this good lesson keep As watchman to my
heart. But good my brother, Do not as some ungracious pastors do, Show
me the steep and thorny way to heaven; Whilst like a puff’d and
reckless libertine Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads, And
recks not his own rede.

LAERTES. O, fear me not. I stay too long. But here my father comes.

 Enter Polonius.

A double blessing is a double grace; Occasion smiles upon a second
leave.

POLONIUS. Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame. The wind sits
in the shoulder of your sail, And you are stay’d for. There, my
blessing with you.

 [_Laying his hand on Laertes’s head._]

And these few precepts in thy memory Look thou character. Give thy
thoughts no tongue, Nor any unproportion’d thought his act. Be thou
familiar, but by no means vulgar. Those friends thou hast, and their
adoption tried, Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel; But do
not dull thy palm with entertainment Of each new-hatch’d, unfledg’d
comrade. Beware Of entrance to a quarrel; but being in, Bear’t that
th’opposed may beware of thee. Give every man thine ear, but few thy
voice: Take each man’s censure, but reserve thy judgment. Costly thy
habit as thy purse can buy, But not express’d in fancy; rich, not
gaudy: For the apparel oft proclaims the man; And they in France of the
best rank and station Are of a most select and generous chief in that.
Neither a borrower nor a lender be: For loan oft loses both itself and
friend; And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry. This above all: to
thine own self be true; And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou
canst not then be false to any man. Farewell: my blessing season this
in thee.

LAERTES. Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.

POLONIUS. The time invites you; go, your servants tend.

LAERTES. Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well What I have said to you.

OPHELIA. ’Tis in my memory lock’d, And you yourself shall keep the key
of it.

LAERTES. Farewell.

 [_Exit._]

POLONIUS. What is’t, Ophelia, he hath said to you?

OPHELIA. So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.

POLONIUS. Marry, well bethought: ’Tis told me he hath very oft of late
Given private time to you; and you yourself Have of your audience been
most free and bounteous. If it be so,—as so ’tis put on me, And that in
way of caution,—I must tell you You do not understand yourself so
clearly As it behoves my daughter and your honour. What is between you?
Give me up the truth.

OPHELIA. He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders Of his affection
to me.

POLONIUS. Affection! Pooh! You speak like a green girl, Unsifted in
such perilous circumstance. Do you believe his tenders, as you call
them?

OPHELIA. I do not know, my lord, what I should think.

POLONIUS. Marry, I’ll teach you; think yourself a baby; That you have
ta’en these tenders for true pay, Which are not sterling. Tender
yourself more dearly; Or,—not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
Roaming it thus,—you’ll tender me a fool.

OPHELIA. My lord, he hath importun’d me with love In honourable
fashion.

POLONIUS. Ay, fashion you may call it; go to, go to.

OPHELIA. And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord, With almost
all the holy vows of heaven.

POLONIUS. Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know, When the blood
burns, how prodigal the soul Lends the tongue vows: these blazes,
daughter, Giving more light than heat, extinct in both, Even in their
promise, as it is a-making, You must not take for fire. From this time
Be something scanter of your maiden presence; Set your entreatments at
a higher rate Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet, Believe so
much in him that he is young; And with a larger tether may he walk Than
may be given you. In few, Ophelia, Do not believe his vows; for they
are brokers, Not of that dye which their investments show, But mere
implorators of unholy suits, Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,
The better to beguile. This is for all. I would not, in plain terms,
from this time forth Have you so slander any moment leisure As to give
words or talk with the Lord Hamlet. Look to’t, I charge you; come your
ways.

OPHELIA. I shall obey, my lord.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. The platform.

 Enter Hamlet, Horatio and Marcellus.

HAMLET. The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.

HORATIO. It is a nipping and an eager air.

HAMLET. What hour now?

HORATIO. I think it lacks of twelve.

MARCELLUS. No, it is struck.

HORATIO. Indeed? I heard it not. It then draws near the season Wherein
the spirit held his wont to walk.

 [_A flourish of trumpets, and ordnance shot off within._]

What does this mean, my lord?

HAMLET. The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse, Keeps wassail,
and the swaggering upspring reels; And as he drains his draughts of
Rhenish down, The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out The triumph of
his pledge.

HORATIO. Is it a custom?

HAMLET. Ay marry is’t; And to my mind, though I am native here, And to
the manner born, it is a custom More honour’d in the breach than the
observance. This heavy-headed revel east and west Makes us traduc’d and
tax’d of other nations: They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish
phrase Soil our addition; and indeed it takes From our achievements,
though perform’d at height, The pith and marrow of our attribute. So
oft it chances in particular men That for some vicious mole of nature
in them, As in their birth, wherein they are not guilty, Since nature
cannot choose his origin, By their o’ergrowth of some complexion, Oft
breaking down the pales and forts of reason; Or by some habit, that too
much o’erleavens The form of plausive manners;—that these men,
Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect, Being Nature’s livery or
Fortune’s star,— His virtues else,—be they as pure as grace, As
infinite as man may undergo, Shall in the general censure take
corruption From that particular fault. The dram of evil Doth all the
noble substance often doubt To his own scandal.

HORATIO. Look, my lord, it comes!

 Enter Ghost.

HAMLET. Angels and ministers of grace defend us! Be thou a spirit of
health or goblin damn’d, Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts
from hell, Be thy intents wicked or charitable, Thou com’st in such a
questionable shape That I will speak to thee. I’ll call thee Hamlet,
King, father, royal Dane. O, answer me! Let me not burst in ignorance;
but tell Why thy canoniz’d bones, hearsed in death, Have burst their
cerements; why the sepulchre, Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn’d, Hath
op’d his ponderous and marble jaws To cast thee up again! What may this
mean, That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel, Revisit’st thus
the glimpses of the moon, Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
So horridly to shake our disposition With thoughts beyond the reaches
of our souls? Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?

 [_Ghost beckons Hamlet._]

HORATIO. It beckons you to go away with it, As if it some impartment
did desire To you alone.

MARCELLUS. Look with what courteous action It waves you to a more
removed ground. But do not go with it.

HORATIO. No, by no means.

HAMLET. It will not speak; then will I follow it.

HORATIO. Do not, my lord.

HAMLET. Why, what should be the fear? I do not set my life at a pin’s
fee; And for my soul, what can it do to that, Being a thing immortal as
itself? It waves me forth again. I’ll follow it.

HORATIO. What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord, Or to the
dreadful summit of the cliff That beetles o’er his base into the sea,
And there assume some other horrible form Which might deprive your
sovereignty of reason, And draw you into madness? Think of it. The very
place puts toys of desperation, Without more motive, into every brain
That looks so many fadoms to the sea And hears it roar beneath.

HAMLET. It waves me still. Go on, I’ll follow thee.

MARCELLUS. You shall not go, my lord.

HAMLET. Hold off your hands.

HORATIO. Be rul’d; you shall not go.

HAMLET. My fate cries out, And makes each petty artery in this body As
hardy as the Nemean lion’s nerve.

 [_Ghost beckons._]

Still am I call’d. Unhand me, gentlemen.

 [_Breaking free from them._]

By heaven, I’ll make a ghost of him that lets me. I say, away!—Go on,
I’ll follow thee.

 [_Exeunt Ghost and Hamlet._]

HORATIO. He waxes desperate with imagination.

MARCELLUS. Let’s follow; ’tis not fit thus to obey him.

HORATIO. Have after. To what issue will this come?

MARCELLUS. Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.

HORATIO. Heaven will direct it.

MARCELLUS. Nay, let’s follow him.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. A more remote part of the Castle.

 Enter Ghost and Hamlet.

HAMLET. Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak, I’ll go no further.

GHOST. Mark me.

HAMLET. I will.

GHOST. My hour is almost come, When I to sulph’rous and tormenting
flames Must render up myself.

HAMLET. Alas, poor ghost!

GHOST. Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing To what I shall
unfold.

HAMLET. Speak, I am bound to hear.

GHOST. So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.

HAMLET. What?

GHOST. I am thy father’s spirit, Doom’d for a certain term to walk the
night, And for the day confin’d to fast in fires, Till the foul crimes
done in my days of nature Are burnt and purg’d away. But that I am
forbid To tell the secrets of my prison-house, I could a tale unfold
whose lightest word Would harrow up thy soul; freeze thy young blood,
Make thy two eyes like stars start from their spheres, Thy knotted and
combined locks to part, And each particular hair to stand on end Like
quills upon the fretful porcupine. But this eternal blazon must not be
To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list! If thou didst ever thy
dear father love—

HAMLET. O God!

GHOST. Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.

HAMLET. Murder!

GHOST. Murder most foul, as in the best it is; But this most foul,
strange, and unnatural.

HAMLET. Haste me to know’t, that I, with wings as swift As meditation
or the thoughts of love May sweep to my revenge.

GHOST. I find thee apt; And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
That rots itself in ease on Lethe wharf, Wouldst thou not stir in this.
Now, Hamlet, hear. ’Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard, A
serpent stung me; so the whole ear of Denmark Is by a forged process of
my death Rankly abus’d; but know, thou noble youth, The serpent that
did sting thy father’s life Now wears his crown.

HAMLET. O my prophetic soul! Mine uncle!

GHOST. Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast, With witchcraft of
his wit, with traitorous gifts,— O wicked wit, and gifts, that have the
power So to seduce!—won to his shameful lust The will of my most
seeming-virtuous queen. O Hamlet, what a falling off was there, From
me, whose love was of that dignity That it went hand in hand even with
the vow I made to her in marriage; and to decline Upon a wretch whose
natural gifts were poor To those of mine. But virtue, as it never will
be mov’d, Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven; So lust,
though to a radiant angel link’d, Will sate itself in a celestial bed
And prey on garbage. But soft! methinks I scent the morning air; Brief
let me be. Sleeping within my orchard, My custom always of the
afternoon, Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole With juice of cursed
hebenon in a vial, And in the porches of my ears did pour The leperous
distilment, whose effect Holds such an enmity with blood of man That
swift as quicksilver it courses through The natural gates and alleys of
the body; And with a sudden vigour it doth posset And curd, like eager
droppings into milk, The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine; And
a most instant tetter bark’d about, Most lazar-like, with vile and
loathsome crust All my smooth body. Thus was I, sleeping, by a
brother’s hand, Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatch’d: Cut off
even in the blossoms of my sin, Unhous’led, disappointed, unanel’d; No
reckoning made, but sent to my account With all my imperfections on my
head. O horrible! O horrible! most horrible! If thou hast nature in
thee, bear it not; Let not the royal bed of Denmark be A couch for
luxury and damned incest. But howsoever thou pursu’st this act, Taint
not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive Against thy mother aught; leave
her to heaven, And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge, To prick
and sting her. Fare thee well at once! The glow-worm shows the matin to
be near, And ’gins to pale his uneffectual fire. Adieu, adieu, adieu.
Hamlet, remember me.

 [_Exit._]

HAMLET. O all you host of heaven! O earth! What else? And shall I
couple hell? O, fie! Hold, my heart; And you, my sinews, grow not
instant old, But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee? Ay, thou poor
ghost, while memory holds a seat In this distracted globe. Remember
thee? Yea, from the table of my memory I’ll wipe away all trivial fond
records, All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past, That youth
and observation copied there; And thy commandment all alone shall live
Within the book and volume of my brain, Unmix’d with baser matter. Yes,
by heaven! O most pernicious woman! O villain, villain, smiling damned
villain! My tables. Meet it is I set it down, That one may smile, and
smile, and be a villain! At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.

 [_Writing._]

So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word; It is ‘Adieu, adieu, remember
me.’ I have sworn’t.

HORATIO and MARCELLUS. [_Within._] My lord, my lord.

MARCELLUS. [_Within._] Lord Hamlet.

HORATIO. [_Within._] Heaven secure him.

HAMLET. So be it!

MARCELLUS. [_Within._] Illo, ho, ho, my lord!

HAMLET. Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come.

 Enter Horatio and Marcellus.

MARCELLUS. How is’t, my noble lord?

HORATIO. What news, my lord?

HAMLET. O, wonderful!

HORATIO. Good my lord, tell it.

HAMLET. No, you’ll reveal it.

HORATIO. Not I, my lord, by heaven.

MARCELLUS. Nor I, my lord.

HAMLET. How say you then, would heart of man once think it?— But you’ll
be secret?

HORATIO and MARCELLUS. Ay, by heaven, my lord.

HAMLET. There’s ne’er a villain dwelling in all Denmark But he’s an
arrant knave.

HORATIO. There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave To tell us
this.

HAMLET. Why, right; you are i’ the right; And so, without more
circumstance at all, I hold it fit that we shake hands and part: You,
as your business and desires shall point you,— For every man hath
business and desire, Such as it is;—and for my own poor part, Look you,
I’ll go pray.

HORATIO. These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.

HAMLET. I’m sorry they offend you, heartily; Yes faith, heartily.

HORATIO. There’s no offence, my lord.

HAMLET. Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio, And much offence
too. Touching this vision here, It is an honest ghost, that let me tell
you. For your desire to know what is between us, O’ermaster’t as you
may. And now, good friends, As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
Give me one poor request.

HORATIO. What is’t, my lord? We will.

HAMLET. Never make known what you have seen tonight.

HORATIO and MARCELLUS. My lord, we will not.

HAMLET. Nay, but swear’t.

HORATIO. In faith, my lord, not I.

MARCELLUS. Nor I, my lord, in faith.

HAMLET. Upon my sword.

MARCELLUS. We have sworn, my lord, already.

HAMLET. Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.

GHOST. [_Cries under the stage._] Swear.

HAMLET. Ha, ha boy, say’st thou so? Art thou there, truepenny? Come on,
you hear this fellow in the cellarage. Consent to swear.

HORATIO. Propose the oath, my lord.

HAMLET. Never to speak of this that you have seen. Swear by my sword.

GHOST. [_Beneath._] Swear.

HAMLET. _Hic et ubique?_ Then we’ll shift our ground. Come hither,
gentlemen, And lay your hands again upon my sword. Never to speak of
this that you have heard. Swear by my sword.

GHOST. [_Beneath._] Swear.

HAMLET. Well said, old mole! Canst work i’ th’earth so fast? A worthy
pioner! Once more remove, good friends.

HORATIO. O day and night, but this is wondrous strange.

HAMLET. And therefore as a stranger give it welcome. There are more
things in heaven and earth, Horatio, Than are dreamt of in your
philosophy. But come, Here, as before, never, so help you mercy, How
strange or odd soe’er I bear myself,— As I perchance hereafter shall
think meet To put an antic disposition on— That you, at such times
seeing me, never shall, With arms encumber’d thus, or this head-shake,
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase, As ‘Well, we know’, or ‘We
could and if we would’, Or ‘If we list to speak’; or ‘There be and if
they might’, Or such ambiguous giving out, to note That you know aught
of me:—this not to do. So grace and mercy at your most need help you,
Swear.

GHOST. [_Beneath._] Swear.

HAMLET. Rest, rest, perturbed spirit. So, gentlemen, With all my love I
do commend me to you; And what so poor a man as Hamlet is May do
t’express his love and friending to you, God willing, shall not lack.
Let us go in together, And still your fingers on your lips, I pray. The
time is out of joint. O cursed spite, That ever I was born to set it
right. Nay, come, let’s go together.

 [_Exeunt._]



ACT II

SCENE I. A room in Polonius’s house.

 Enter Polonius and Reynaldo.

POLONIUS. Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.

REYNALDO. I will, my lord.

POLONIUS. You shall do marvellous wisely, good Reynaldo, Before you
visit him, to make inquiry Of his behaviour.

REYNALDO. My lord, I did intend it.

POLONIUS. Marry, well said; very well said. Look you, sir, Enquire me
first what Danskers are in Paris; And how, and who, what means, and
where they keep, What company, at what expense; and finding By this
encompassment and drift of question, That they do know my son, come you
more nearer Than your particular demands will touch it. Take you as
’twere some distant knowledge of him, As thus, ‘I know his father and
his friends, And in part him’—do you mark this, Reynaldo?

REYNALDO. Ay, very well, my lord.

POLONIUS. ‘And in part him, but,’ you may say, ‘not well; But if’t be
he I mean, he’s very wild; Addicted so and so;’ and there put on him
What forgeries you please; marry, none so rank As may dishonour him;
take heed of that; But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips As are
companions noted and most known To youth and liberty.

REYNALDO. As gaming, my lord?

POLONIUS. Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, Quarrelling, drabbing.
You may go so far.

REYNALDO. My lord, that would dishonour him.

POLONIUS. Faith no, as you may season it in the charge. You must not
put another scandal on him, That he is open to incontinency; That’s not
my meaning: but breathe his faults so quaintly That they may seem the
taints of liberty; The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind, A savageness
in unreclaimed blood, Of general assault.

REYNALDO. But my good lord—

POLONIUS. Wherefore should you do this?

REYNALDO. Ay, my lord, I would know that.

POLONIUS. Marry, sir, here’s my drift, And I believe it is a fetch of
warrant. You laying these slight sullies on my son, As ’twere a thing a
little soil’d i’ th’ working, Mark you, Your party in converse, him you
would sound, Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes The youth you
breathe of guilty, be assur’d He closes with you in this consequence;
‘Good sir,’ or so; or ‘friend,’ or ‘gentleman’— According to the phrase
or the addition Of man and country.

REYNALDO. Very good, my lord.

POLONIUS. And then, sir, does he this,— He does—What was I about to
say? By the mass, I was about to say something. Where did I leave?

REYNALDO. At ‘closes in the consequence.’ At ‘friend or so,’ and
‘gentleman.’

POLONIUS. At ‘closes in the consequence’ ay, marry! He closes with you
thus: ‘I know the gentleman, I saw him yesterday, or t’other day, Or
then, or then, with such and such; and, as you say, There was he
gaming, there o’ertook in’s rouse, There falling out at tennis’: or
perchance, ‘I saw him enter such a house of sale’— _Videlicet_, a
brothel, or so forth. See you now; Your bait of falsehood takes this
carp of truth; And thus do we of wisdom and of reach, With windlasses,
and with assays of bias, By indirections find directions out. So by my
former lecture and advice Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?

REYNALDO. My lord, I have.

POLONIUS. God b’ wi’ you, fare you well.

REYNALDO. Good my lord.

POLONIUS. Observe his inclination in yourself.

REYNALDO. I shall, my lord.

POLONIUS. And let him ply his music.

REYNALDO. Well, my lord.

POLONIUS. Farewell.

 [_Exit Reynaldo._]

 Enter Ophelia.

How now, Ophelia, what’s the matter?

OPHELIA. Alas, my lord, I have been so affrighted.

POLONIUS. With what, in the name of God?

OPHELIA. My lord, as I was sewing in my chamber, Lord Hamlet, with his
doublet all unbrac’d, No hat upon his head, his stockings foul’d,
Ungart’red, and down-gyved to his ankle, Pale as his shirt, his knees
knocking each other, And with a look so piteous in purport As if he had
been loosed out of hell To speak of horrors, he comes before me.

POLONIUS. Mad for thy love?

OPHELIA. My lord, I do not know, but truly I do fear it.

POLONIUS. What said he?

OPHELIA. He took me by the wrist and held me hard; Then goes he to the
length of all his arm; And with his other hand thus o’er his brow, He
falls to such perusal of my face As he would draw it. Long stay’d he
so, At last,—a little shaking of mine arm, And thrice his head thus
waving up and down, He rais’d a sigh so piteous and profound As it did
seem to shatter all his bulk And end his being. That done, he lets me
go, And with his head over his shoulder turn’d He seem’d to find his
way without his eyes, For out o’ doors he went without their help, And
to the last bended their light on me.

POLONIUS. Come, go with me. I will go seek the King. This is the very
ecstasy of love, Whose violent property fordoes itself, And leads the
will to desperate undertakings, As oft as any passion under heaven That
does afflict our natures. I am sorry,— What, have you given him any
hard words of late?

OPHELIA. No, my good lord; but as you did command, I did repel his
letters and denied His access to me.

POLONIUS. That hath made him mad. I am sorry that with better heed and
judgment I had not quoted him. I fear’d he did but trifle, And meant to
wreck thee. But beshrew my jealousy! It seems it is as proper to our
age To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions As it is common for the
younger sort To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King. This must be
known, which, being kept close, might move More grief to hide than hate
to utter love.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A room in the Castle.

 Enter King, Queen, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern and Attendants.

KING. Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. Moreover that we much
did long to see you, The need we have to use you did provoke Our hasty
sending. Something have you heard Of Hamlet’s transformation; so I call
it, Since nor th’exterior nor the inward man Resembles that it was.
What it should be, More than his father’s death, that thus hath put him
So much from th’understanding of himself, I cannot dream of. I entreat
you both That, being of so young days brought up with him, And since so
neighbour’d to his youth and humour, That you vouchsafe your rest here
in our court Some little time, so by your companies To draw him on to
pleasures and to gather, So much as from occasion you may glean,
Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus That, open’d, lies within
our remedy.

QUEEN. Good gentlemen, he hath much talk’d of you, And sure I am, two
men there are not living To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
To show us so much gentry and good will As to expend your time with us
awhile, For the supply and profit of our hope, Your visitation shall
receive such thanks As fits a king’s remembrance.

ROSENCRANTZ. Both your majesties Might, by the sovereign power you have
of us, Put your dread pleasures more into command Than to entreaty.

GUILDENSTERN. We both obey, And here give up ourselves, in the full
bent, To lay our service freely at your feet To be commanded.

KING. Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.

QUEEN. Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz. And I beseech you
instantly to visit My too much changed son. Go, some of you, And bring
these gentlemen where Hamlet is.

GUILDENSTERN. Heavens make our presence and our practices Pleasant and
helpful to him.

QUEEN. Ay, amen.

 [_Exeunt Rosencrantz, Guildenstern and some Attendants._]

 Enter Polonius.

POLONIUS. Th’ambassadors from Norway, my good lord, Are joyfully
return’d.

KING. Thou still hast been the father of good news.

POLONIUS. Have I, my lord? Assure you, my good liege, I hold my duty,
as I hold my soul, Both to my God and to my gracious King: And I do
think,—or else this brain of mine Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
As it hath us’d to do—that I have found The very cause of Hamlet’s
lunacy.

KING. O speak of that, that do I long to hear.

POLONIUS. Give first admittance to th’ambassadors; My news shall be the
fruit to that great feast.

KING. Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.

 [_Exit Polonius._]

He tells me, my sweet queen, that he hath found The head and source of
all your son’s distemper.

QUEEN. I doubt it is no other but the main, His father’s death and our
o’erhasty marriage.

KING. Well, we shall sift him.

 Enter Polonius with Voltemand and Cornelius.

Welcome, my good friends! Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?

VOLTEMAND. Most fair return of greetings and desires. Upon our first,
he sent out to suppress His nephew’s levies, which to him appear’d To
be a preparation ’gainst the Polack; But better look’d into, he truly
found It was against your Highness; whereat griev’d, That so his
sickness, age, and impotence Was falsely borne in hand, sends out
arrests On Fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys, Receives rebuke from
Norway; and in fine, Makes vow before his uncle never more To give
th’assay of arms against your Majesty. Whereon old Norway, overcome
with joy, Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee, And his
commission to employ those soldiers So levied as before, against the
Polack: With an entreaty, herein further shown, [_Gives a paper._] That
it might please you to give quiet pass Through your dominions for this
enterprise, On such regards of safety and allowance As therein are set
down.

KING. It likes us well; And at our more consider’d time we’ll read,
Answer, and think upon this business. Meantime we thank you for your
well-took labour. Go to your rest, at night we’ll feast together:. Most
welcome home.

 [_Exeunt Voltemand and Cornelius._]

POLONIUS. This business is well ended. My liege and madam, to
expostulate What majesty should be, what duty is, Why day is day, night
night, and time is time. Were nothing but to waste night, day and time.
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit, And tediousness the limbs
and outward flourishes, I will be brief. Your noble son is mad. Mad
call I it; for to define true madness, What is’t but to be nothing else
but mad? But let that go.

QUEEN. More matter, with less art.

POLONIUS. Madam, I swear I use no art at all. That he is mad, ’tis
true: ’tis true ’tis pity; And pity ’tis ’tis true. A foolish figure,
But farewell it, for I will use no art. Mad let us grant him then. And
now remains That we find out the cause of this effect, Or rather say,
the cause of this defect, For this effect defective comes by cause.
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus. Perpend, I have a
daughter—have whilst she is mine— Who in her duty and obedience, mark,
Hath given me this. Now gather, and surmise. [_Reads._] _To the
celestial, and my soul’s idol, the most beautified Ophelia_— That’s an
ill phrase, a vile phrase; ‘beautified’ is a vile phrase: but you shall
hear. [_Reads._] _these; in her excellent white bosom, these, &c._

QUEEN. Came this from Hamlet to her?

POLONIUS. Good madam, stay awhile; I will be faithful. [_Reads._]
_Doubt thou the stars are fire, Doubt that the sun doth move, Doubt
truth to be a liar, But never doubt I love. O dear Ophelia, I am ill at
these numbers. I have not art to reckon my groans. But that I love thee
best, O most best, believe it. Adieu. Thine evermore, most dear lady,
whilst this machine is to him, HAMLET._ This in obedience hath my
daughter show’d me; And more above, hath his solicitings, As they fell
out by time, by means, and place, All given to mine ear.

KING. But how hath she receiv’d his love?

POLONIUS. What do you think of me?

KING. As of a man faithful and honourable.

POLONIUS. I would fain prove so. But what might you think, When I had
seen this hot love on the wing, As I perceiv’d it, I must tell you
that, Before my daughter told me, what might you, Or my dear Majesty
your queen here, think, If I had play’d the desk or table-book, Or
given my heart a winking, mute and dumb, Or look’d upon this love with
idle sight, What might you think? No, I went round to work, And my
young mistress thus I did bespeak: ‘Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy
star. This must not be.’ And then I precepts gave her, That she should
lock herself from his resort, Admit no messengers, receive no tokens.
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice, And he, repulsed,—a short
tale to make— Fell into a sadness, then into a fast, Thence to a watch,
thence into a weakness, Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
Into the madness wherein now he raves, And all we wail for.

KING. Do you think ’tis this?

QUEEN. It may be, very likely.

POLONIUS. Hath there been such a time, I’d fain know that, That I have
positively said ‘’Tis so,’ When it prov’d otherwise?

KING. Not that I know.

POLONIUS. Take this from this, if this be otherwise. [_Points to his
head and shoulder._] If circumstances lead me, I will find Where truth
is hid, though it were hid indeed Within the centre.

KING. How may we try it further?

POLONIUS. You know sometimes he walks four hours together Here in the
lobby.

QUEEN. So he does indeed.

POLONIUS. At such a time I’ll loose my daughter to him. Be you and I
behind an arras then, Mark the encounter. If he love her not, And be
not from his reason fall’n thereon, Let me be no assistant for a state,
But keep a farm and carters.

KING. We will try it.

 Enter Hamlet, reading.

QUEEN. But look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.

POLONIUS. Away, I do beseech you, both away I’ll board him presently.
O, give me leave.

 [_Exeunt King, Queen and Attendants._]

How does my good Lord Hamlet?

HAMLET. Well, God-a-mercy.

POLONIUS. Do you know me, my lord?

HAMLET. Excellent well. You’re a fishmonger.

POLONIUS. Not I, my lord.

HAMLET. Then I would you were so honest a man.

POLONIUS. Honest, my lord?

HAMLET. Ay sir, to be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man
picked out of ten thousand.

POLONIUS. That’s very true, my lord.

HAMLET. For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a good
kissing carrion,— Have you a daughter?

POLONIUS. I have, my lord.

HAMLET. Let her not walk i’ th’ sun. Conception is a blessing, but not
as your daughter may conceive. Friend, look to’t.

POLONIUS. How say you by that? [_Aside._] Still harping on my daughter.
Yet he knew me not at first; he said I was a fishmonger. He is far
gone, far gone. And truly in my youth I suffered much extremity for
love; very near this. I’ll speak to him again.—What do you read, my
lord?

HAMLET. Words, words, words.

POLONIUS. What is the matter, my lord?

HAMLET. Between who?

POLONIUS. I mean the matter that you read, my lord.

HAMLET. Slanders, sir. For the satirical slave says here that old men
have grey beards; that their faces are wrinkled; their eyes purging
thick amber and plum-tree gum; and that they have a plentiful lack of
wit, together with most weak hams. All which, sir, though I most
powerfully and potently believe, yet I hold it not honesty to have it
thus set down. For you yourself, sir, should be old as I am, if like a
crab you could go backward.

POLONIUS. [_Aside._] Though this be madness, yet there is a method
in’t.— Will you walk out of the air, my lord?

HAMLET. Into my grave?

POLONIUS. Indeed, that is out o’ the air. [_Aside._] How pregnant
sometimes his replies are! A happiness that often madness hits on,
which reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of meeting between him
and my daughter. My honourable lord, I will most humbly take my leave
of you.

HAMLET. You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I will more
willingly part withal, except my life, except my life, except my life.

POLONIUS. Fare you well, my lord.

HAMLET. These tedious old fools.

 Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

POLONIUS. You go to seek the Lord Hamlet; there he is.

ROSENCRANTZ. [_To Polonius._] God save you, sir.

 [_Exit Polonius._]

GUILDENSTERN. My honoured lord!

ROSENCRANTZ. My most dear lord!

HAMLET. My excellent good friends! How dost thou, Guildenstern? Ah,
Rosencrantz. Good lads, how do ye both?

ROSENCRANTZ. As the indifferent children of the earth.

GUILDENSTERN. Happy in that we are not over-happy; On Fortune’s cap we
are not the very button.

HAMLET. Nor the soles of her shoe?

ROSENCRANTZ. Neither, my lord.

HAMLET. Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her favours?

GUILDENSTERN. Faith, her privates we.

HAMLET. In the secret parts of Fortune? O, most true; she is a
strumpet. What’s the news?

ROSENCRANTZ. None, my lord, but that the world’s grown honest.

HAMLET. Then is doomsday near. But your news is not true. Let me
question more in particular. What have you, my good friends, deserved
at the hands of Fortune, that she sends you to prison hither?

GUILDENSTERN. Prison, my lord?

HAMLET. Denmark’s a prison.

ROSENCRANTZ. Then is the world one.

HAMLET. A goodly one; in which there are many confines, wards, and
dungeons, Denmark being one o’ th’ worst.

ROSENCRANTZ. We think not so, my lord.

HAMLET. Why, then ’tis none to you; for there is nothing either good or
bad but thinking makes it so. To me it is a prison.

ROSENCRANTZ. Why, then your ambition makes it one; ’tis too narrow for
your mind.

HAMLET. O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell, and count myself a
king of infinite space, were it not that I have bad dreams.

GUILDENSTERN. Which dreams, indeed, are ambition; for the very
substance of the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.

HAMLET. A dream itself is but a shadow.

ROSENCRANTZ. Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a quality
that it is but a shadow’s shadow.

HAMLET. Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretch’d
heroes the beggars’ shadows. Shall we to th’ court? For, by my fay, I
cannot reason.

ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN. We’ll wait upon you.

HAMLET. No such matter. I will not sort you with the rest of my
servants; for, to speak to you like an honest man, I am most dreadfully
attended. But, in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at
Elsinore?

ROSENCRANTZ. To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.

HAMLET. Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but I thank you.
And sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny. Were you
not sent for? Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come,
deal justly with me. Come, come; nay, speak.

GUILDENSTERN. What should we say, my lord?

HAMLET. Why, anything. But to the purpose. You were sent for; and there
is a kind of confession in your looks, which your modesties have not
craft enough to colour. I know the good King and Queen have sent for
you.

ROSENCRANTZ. To what end, my lord?

HAMLET. That you must teach me. But let me conjure you, by the rights
of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the obligation of
our ever-preserved love, and by what more dear a better proposer could
charge you withal, be even and direct with me, whether you were sent
for or no.

ROSENCRANTZ. [_To Guildenstern._] What say you?

HAMLET. [_Aside._] Nay, then I have an eye of you. If you love me, hold
not off.

GUILDENSTERN. My lord, we were sent for.

HAMLET. I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation prevent your
discovery, and your secrecy to the King and Queen moult no feather. I
have of late, but wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all
custom of exercises; and indeed, it goes so heavily with my disposition
that this goodly frame the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory;
this most excellent canopy the air, look you, this brave o’erhanging
firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire, why, it
appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of
vapours. What a piece of work is man! How noble in reason? How infinite
in faculties, in form and moving, how express and admirable? In action
how like an angel? In apprehension, how like a god? The beauty of the
world, the paragon of animals. And yet, to me, what is this
quintessence of dust? Man delights not me; no, nor woman neither,
though by your smiling you seem to say so.

ROSENCRANTZ. My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.

HAMLET. Why did you laugh then, when I said ‘Man delights not me’?

ROSENCRANTZ. To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what Lenten
entertainment the players shall receive from you. We coted them on the
way, and hither are they coming to offer you service.

HAMLET. He that plays the king shall be welcome,—his Majesty shall have
tribute of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and target;
the lover shall not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his part in
peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose lungs are tickle a’ th’
sere; and the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall
halt for’t. What players are they?

ROSENCRANTZ. Even those you were wont to take such delight in—the
tragedians of the city.

HAMLET. How chances it they travel? Their residence, both in reputation
and profit, was better both ways.

ROSENCRANTZ. I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late
innovation.

HAMLET. Do they hold the same estimation they did when I was in the
city? Are they so followed?

ROSENCRANTZ. No, indeed, they are not.

HAMLET. How comes it? Do they grow rusty?

ROSENCRANTZ. Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace; but there
is, sir, an ayry of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top of
question, and are most tyrannically clapped for’t. These are now the
fashion, and so berattle the common stages—so they call them—that many
wearing rapiers are afraid of goose-quills and dare scarce come
thither.

HAMLET. What, are they children? Who maintains ’em? How are they
escoted? Will they pursue the quality no longer than they can sing?
Will they not say afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common
players—as it is most like, if their means are no better—their writers
do them wrong to make them exclaim against their own succession?

ROSENCRANTZ. Faith, there has been much to do on both sides; and the
nation holds it no sin to tarre them to controversy. There was for a
while, no money bid for argument unless the poet and the player went to
cuffs in the question.

HAMLET. Is’t possible?

GUILDENSTERN. O, there has been much throwing about of brains.

HAMLET. Do the boys carry it away?

ROSENCRANTZ. Ay, that they do, my lord. Hercules and his load too.

HAMLET. It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of Denmark, and
those that would make mouths at him while my father lived, give twenty,
forty, fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little.
’Sblood, there is something in this more than natural, if philosophy
could find it out.

 [_Flourish of trumpets within._]

GUILDENSTERN. There are the players.

HAMLET. Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore. Your hands, come. The
appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply with you
in this garb, lest my extent to the players, which I tell you must show
fairly outward, should more appear like entertainment than yours. You
are welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are deceived.

GUILDENSTERN. In what, my dear lord?

HAMLET. I am but mad north-north-west. When the wind is southerly, I
know a hawk from a handsaw.

 Enter Polonius.

POLONIUS. Well be with you, gentlemen.

HAMLET. Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too, at each ear a hearer. That
great baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling clouts.

ROSENCRANTZ. Happily he’s the second time come to them; for they say an
old man is twice a child.

HAMLET. I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players. Mark
it.—You say right, sir: for a Monday morning ’twas so indeed.

POLONIUS. My lord, I have news to tell you.

HAMLET. My lord, I have news to tell you. When Roscius was an actor in
Rome—

POLONIUS. The actors are come hither, my lord.

HAMLET. Buzz, buzz.

POLONIUS. Upon my honour.

HAMLET. Then came each actor on his ass—

POLONIUS. The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy,
history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral,
tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene
individable, or poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor Plautus
too light, for the law of writ and the liberty. These are the only men.

HAMLET. O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!

POLONIUS. What treasure had he, my lord?

HAMLET. Why— ’One fair daughter, and no more, The which he loved
passing well.’

POLONIUS. [_Aside._] Still on my daughter.

HAMLET. Am I not i’ th’ right, old Jephthah?

POLONIUS. If you call me Jephthah, my lord, I have a daughter that I
love passing well.

HAMLET. Nay, that follows not.

POLONIUS. What follows then, my lord?

HAMLET. Why, As by lot, God wot, and then, you know, It came to pass,
as most like it was. The first row of the pious chanson will show you
more. For look where my abridgement comes.

 Enter four or five Players.

You are welcome, masters, welcome all. I am glad to see thee well.
Welcome, good friends. O, my old friend! Thy face is valanc’d since I
saw thee last. Com’st thou to beard me in Denmark? What, my young lady
and mistress! By’r lady, your ladyship is nearer to heaven than when I
saw you last, by the altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a
piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the ring. Masters, you
are all welcome. We’ll e’en to’t like French falconers, fly at anything
we see. We’ll have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your
quality. Come, a passionate speech.

FIRST PLAYER. What speech, my lord?

HAMLET. I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted, or
if it was, not above once, for the play, I remember, pleased not the
million, ’twas caviare to the general. But it was—as I received it, and
others, whose judgments in such matters cried in the top of mine—an
excellent play, well digested in the scenes, set down with as much
modesty as cunning. I remember one said there were no sallets in the
lines to make the matter savoury, nor no matter in the phrase that
might indite the author of affectation, but called it an honest method,
as wholesome as sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. One
speech in it, I chiefly loved. ’Twas Aeneas’ tale to Dido, and
thereabout of it especially where he speaks of Priam’s slaughter. If it
live in your memory, begin at this line, let me see, let me see: _The
rugged Pyrrhus, like th’ Hyrcanian beast,—_ It is not so: it begins
with Pyrrhus— _The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms, Black as his
purpose, did the night resemble When he lay couched in the ominous
horse, Hath now this dread and black complexion smear’d With heraldry
more dismal. Head to foot Now is he total gules, horridly trick’d With
blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, Bak’d and impasted with the
parching streets, That lend a tyrannous and a damned light To their
vile murders. Roasted in wrath and fire, And thus o’ersized with
coagulate gore, With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus Old
grandsire Priam seeks._ So, proceed you.

POLONIUS. ’Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good
discretion.

FIRST PLAYER. _Anon he finds him, Striking too short at Greeks. His
antique sword, Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls, Repugnant to
command. Unequal match’d, Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes
wide; But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword Th’unnerved father
falls. Then senseless Ilium, Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming
top Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash Takes prisoner
Pyrrhus’ ear. For lo, his sword, Which was declining on the milky head
Of reverend Priam, seem’d i’ th’air to stick. So, as a painted tyrant,
Pyrrhus stood, And like a neutral to his will and matter, Did nothing.
But as we often see against some storm, A silence in the heavens, the
rack stand still, The bold winds speechless, and the orb below As hush
as death, anon the dreadful thunder Doth rend the region; so after
Pyrrhus’ pause, Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work, And never did
the Cyclops’ hammers fall On Mars’s armour, forg’d for proof eterne,
With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword Now falls on Priam. Out,
out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods, In general synod, take away
her power; Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel, And bowl
the round nave down the hill of heaven, As low as to the fiends._

POLONIUS. This is too long.

HAMLET. It shall to the barber’s, with your beard.—Prythee say on. He’s
for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps. Say on; come to Hecuba.

FIRST PLAYER. _But who, O who, had seen the mobled queen,—_

HAMLET. ‘The mobled queen’?

POLONIUS. That’s good! ‘Mobled queen’ is good.

FIRST PLAYER. _Run barefoot up and down, threat’ning the flames With
bisson rheum. A clout upon that head Where late the diadem stood, and
for a robe, About her lank and all o’erteemed loins, A blanket, in
th’alarm of fear caught up— Who this had seen, with tongue in venom
steep’d, ’Gainst Fortune’s state would treason have pronounc’d. But if
the gods themselves did see her then, When she saw Pyrrhus make
malicious sport In mincing with his sword her husband’s limbs, The
instant burst of clamour that she made,— Unless things mortal move them
not at all,— Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven, And
passion in the gods._

POLONIUS. Look, where he has not turn’d his colour, and has tears in’s
eyes. Pray you, no more.

HAMLET. ’Tis well. I’ll have thee speak out the rest of this soon.—Good
my lord, will you see the players well bestowed? Do you hear, let them
be well used; for they are the abstracts and brief chronicles of the
time. After your death you were better have a bad epitaph than their
ill report while you live.

POLONIUS. My lord, I will use them according to their desert.

HAMLET. God’s bodikin, man, better. Use every man after his desert, and
who should scape whipping? Use them after your own honour and dignity.
The less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty. Take them in.

POLONIUS. Come, sirs.

HAMLET. Follow him, friends. We’ll hear a play tomorrow.

 [_Exeunt Polonius with all the Players but the First._]

Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can you play _The Murder of Gonzago_?

FIRST PLAYER. Ay, my lord.

HAMLET. We’ll ha’t tomorrow night. You could for a need study a speech
of some dozen or sixteen lines, which I would set down and insert in’t,
could you not?

FIRST PLAYER. Ay, my lord.

HAMLET. Very well. Follow that lord, and look you mock him not.

 [_Exit First Player._]

[_To Rosencrantz and Guildenstern_] My good friends, I’ll leave you
till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.

ROSENCRANTZ. Good my lord.

 [_Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern._]

HAMLET. Ay, so, God b’ wi’ ye. Now I am alone. O what a rogue and
peasant slave am I! Is it not monstrous that this player here, But in a
fiction, in a dream of passion, Could force his soul so to his own
conceit That from her working all his visage wan’d; Tears in his eyes,
distraction in’s aspect, A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
With forms to his conceit? And all for nothing! For Hecuba? What’s
Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba, That he should weep for her? What would
he do, Had he the motive and the cue for passion That I have? He would
drown the stage with tears And cleave the general ear with horrid
speech; Make mad the guilty, and appal the free, Confound the ignorant,
and amaze indeed, The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I, A dull
and muddy-mettled rascal, peak Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my
cause, And can say nothing. No, not for a king Upon whose property and
most dear life A damn’d defeat was made. Am I a coward? Who calls me
villain, breaks my pate across? Plucks off my beard and blows it in my
face? Tweaks me by the nose, gives me the lie i’ th’ throat As deep as
to the lungs? Who does me this? Ha! ’Swounds, I should take it: for it
cannot be But I am pigeon-liver’d, and lack gall To make oppression
bitter, or ere this I should have fatted all the region kites With this
slave’s offal. Bloody, bawdy villain! Remorseless, treacherous,
lecherous, kindless villain! Oh vengeance! Why, what an ass am I! This
is most brave, That I, the son of a dear father murder’d, Prompted to
my revenge by heaven and hell, Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with
words And fall a-cursing like a very drab, A scullion! Fie upon’t! Foh!
About, my brain! I have heard That guilty creatures sitting at a play,
Have by the very cunning of the scene, Been struck so to the soul that
presently They have proclaim’d their malefactions. For murder, though
it have no tongue, will speak With most miraculous organ. I’ll have
these players Play something like the murder of my father Before mine
uncle. I’ll observe his looks; I’ll tent him to the quick. If he but
blench, I know my course. The spirit that I have seen May be the devil,
and the devil hath power T’assume a pleasing shape, yea, and perhaps
Out of my weakness and my melancholy, As he is very potent with such
spirits, Abuses me to damn me. I’ll have grounds More relative than
this. The play’s the thing Wherein I’ll catch the conscience of the
King.

 [_Exit._]



ACT III

SCENE I. A room in the Castle.

 Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

KING. And can you by no drift of circumstance Get from him why he puts
on this confusion, Grating so harshly all his days of quiet With
turbulent and dangerous lunacy?

ROSENCRANTZ. He does confess he feels himself distracted, But from what
cause he will by no means speak.

GUILDENSTERN. Nor do we find him forward to be sounded, But with a
crafty madness keeps aloof When we would bring him on to some
confession Of his true state.

QUEEN. Did he receive you well?

ROSENCRANTZ. Most like a gentleman.

GUILDENSTERN. But with much forcing of his disposition.

ROSENCRANTZ. Niggard of question, but of our demands, Most free in his
reply.

QUEEN. Did you assay him to any pastime?

ROSENCRANTZ. Madam, it so fell out that certain players We o’er-raught
on the way. Of these we told him, And there did seem in him a kind of
joy To hear of it. They are about the court, And, as I think, they have
already order This night to play before him.

POLONIUS. ’Tis most true; And he beseech’d me to entreat your Majesties
To hear and see the matter.

KING. With all my heart; and it doth much content me To hear him so
inclin’d. Good gentlemen, give him a further edge, And drive his
purpose on to these delights.

ROSENCRANTZ. We shall, my lord.

 [_Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern._]

KING. Sweet Gertrude, leave us too, For we have closely sent for Hamlet
hither, That he, as ’twere by accident, may here Affront Ophelia. Her
father and myself, lawful espials, Will so bestow ourselves that,
seeing unseen, We may of their encounter frankly judge, And gather by
him, as he is behav’d, If’t be th’affliction of his love or no That
thus he suffers for.

QUEEN. I shall obey you. And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish That
your good beauties be the happy cause Of Hamlet’s wildness: so shall I
hope your virtues Will bring him to his wonted way again, To both your
honours.

OPHELIA. Madam, I wish it may.

 [_Exit Queen._]

POLONIUS. Ophelia, walk you here.—Gracious, so please you, We will
bestow ourselves.—[_To Ophelia._] Read on this book, That show of such
an exercise may colour Your loneliness.—We are oft to blame in this,
’Tis too much prov’d, that with devotion’s visage And pious action we
do sugar o’er The devil himself.

KING. [_Aside._] O ’tis too true! How smart a lash that speech doth
give my conscience! The harlot’s cheek, beautied with plastering art,
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it Than is my deed to my most
painted word. O heavy burden!

POLONIUS. I hear him coming. Let’s withdraw, my lord.

 [_Exeunt King and Polonius._]

 Enter Hamlet.

HAMLET. To be, or not to be, that is the question: Whether ’tis nobler
in the mind to suffer The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, Or
to take arms against a sea of troubles, And by opposing end them? To
die—to sleep, No more; and by a sleep to say we end The heart-ache, and
the thousand natural shocks That flesh is heir to: ’tis a consummation
Devoutly to be wish’d. To die, to sleep. To sleep, perchance to
dream—ay, there’s the rub, For in that sleep of death what dreams may
come, When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, Must give us pause.
There’s the respect That makes calamity of so long life. For who would
bear the whips and scorns of time, The oppressor’s wrong, the proud
man’s contumely, The pangs of dispriz’d love, the law’s delay, The
insolence of office, and the spurns That patient merit of the unworthy
takes, When he himself might his quietus make With a bare bodkin? Who
would these fardels bear, To grunt and sweat under a weary life, But
that the dread of something after death, The undiscover’d country, from
whose bourn No traveller returns, puzzles the will, And makes us rather
bear those ills we have Than fly to others that we know not of? Thus
conscience does make cowards of us all, And thus the native hue of
resolution Is sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought, And
enterprises of great pith and moment, With this regard their currents
turn awry And lose the name of action. Soft you now, The fair Ophelia!
Nymph, in thy o